chore: better gradle setup (#188)
callstackincubator/react-native-node-api: docs/ANDROID.md

# Android support

> ## Android setup

Author: Thanks for spotting this.

### Step 1: `settings.gradle`

Gradle needs special handling to build React Native from source. In your app's `settings.gradle` please include the below:

```groovy
// customize the path to match your node_modules location

> apply(from: "../../../node_modules/react-native-node-api/android/consumerSettings.gradle")

Author: Right, it may be more appropriate for script names.

applyNodeAPISettings(settings)
```

### Step 2: script for adjusting environment variables

> To integrate automatic setup of Hermes engine, a special env variable (`REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR`) must be set to a proper path. Since Gradle does not really support loading `.env` files, this must be automated by the consumer. We provide the script `react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent` which will output a single line, the path to Hermes directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A special environment variable (`REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR`) must be set to the path of a Hermes engine with Node-API support. Since Gradle does not support loading `.env` files directly, this must be automated by the consumer. We provide the `react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent` command, which will download Hermes and output the path to Hermes directory path as its only output.
```

Author: Thanks, this is more clear - applied.

> Each time you run Android Studio, make sure this is in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each time you run Android Studio or start the Android app from a terminal, make sure this is in place.
```

Author: I'd only change 'start' to 'build' - applied 👍

### How it works: building Hermes from source

Because we're using a version of Hermes patched with Node-API support, we need to build React Native from source.

> Alternatively, if for whatever reason you want to do it manually, you can do so by exporting this environment variable before Gradle invocation:

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence. Unfortunately, all of this is pretty manual at the moment. Do you mean, if you want to build and run the app via a terminal?

Author: Right, this is also a leftover I have to correct.

```

> export REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR="$(npx react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent)"

Reviewer: 👍

## Building Hermes from source

### Step 1: `settings.gradle`

Gradle needs specific configuration to build React Native from source: dependency substitutions for React Native & Hermes modules, and modifications to default logic in RN build scripts, which is done by setting an environment variable, as described in this section.

In your app's `settings.gradle` please include the below:

```groovy
// customize the path to match your node_modules location

> apply(from: "../../../node_modules/react-native-node-api/android/app-settings.gradle")

Reviewer: When we introduce our own settings script it becomes a bit more magical IMO and I'm not 100% convinced this is an increase in DX 🤔 There's something "simple" in just instructing users to build React Native from source and defer to whatever upstream documentation is available for doing that, with a code-snippet to make it easier.

Reviewer 2: Right now we have asymmetry between the iOS and Android sides – iOS is set up automatically, while Gradle isn't. So I think we need to at least make things consistent.

If this were an Expo project, I'd probably arrange it as a config plugin called `withBuildReactNativeFromSource`, so that it involves no magic specific `react-native-node-api` and is just clearly a convenience function.

**I think it's okay to defer to the upstream docs for building React Native from source. Maybe that part needn't be handled by our plugin, then?**

Something I would like to improve the DX on, though, is this part:

```sh
export REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR=`npx react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent`
```

It's a pain because it relies on shell stuff, so there's great potential for people to get it wrong (e.g. run it in the wrong directory or forget to export it again).

If this were an Expo project, I'd probably say that `npx react-native-node-api vendor-hermes` should just append the necessary env var into `.env.local` for you. But because React Native Community CLI projects don't have any standard env file that they source variables from, and because React Native strictly grabs that variable via `System.getenv()` (in both [react-native-gradle-plugin](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/52f2cbab41297d4e5689c112188f67d3c6150fe9/packages/gradle-plugin/react-native-gradle-plugin/src/main/kotlin/com/facebook/react/utils/PathUtils.kt#L140) and [hermes-engine](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/52f2cbab41297d4e5689c112188f67d3c6150fe9/packages/react-native/ReactAndroid/hermes-engine/build.gradle.kts#L65)), I'm not sure we have any great options.

Any ideas?

> apply(from: "../../../node_modules/react-native-node-api/android/app-settings.gradle")

Reviewer 2: This path (`../../../node_modules`) assumes a monorepo structure, so won't work on a regular repo.

Can we use proper Node module resolution instead? As demonstrated [here](https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/ab9f960751807743c596f80b56e698118d1aeb53/templates/expo-template-bare-minimum/android/app/build.gradle#L13).

applyNodeAPISettings(settings)
```

### Step 2: script for adjusting environment variables

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Each time you run Android Studio or build the Android app from a terminal, make sure the below is in place.

> Because we're using a version of Hermes patched with Node-API support, we need to build React Native from source. A special environment variable (`REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR`) must be set to the path of a Hermes engine with Node-API support. Since Gradle does not support loading `.env` files directly, this must be automated by the consumer. We provide the `react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent` command, which will download Hermes and output the path to Hermes directory path as its only output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we're using a version of Hermes patched with Node-API support, we need to build React Native and Hermes from source. A special environment variable (`REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR`) must be set to the path of a Hermes engine with Node-API support. Since Gradle does not support loading `.env` files directly, this must be automated by the app developer. We provide the `react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent` command, which will download Hermes and output the path to Hermes directory path as its only output.
```

You can configure the environment variable using the following command:

```
export REACT_NATIVE_OVERRIDE_HERMES_DIR="$(npx react-native-node-api vendor-hermes --silent)"
```

> This either needs to be done each time before Gradle / Android Studio invocation, or permanently in a shell init script such as `~/.zshrc` on Zsh (MacOS) or `~/.bashrc` on Bash (Linux).

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is a good suggestion. It has the potential to mess up people's setup, quite significantly - in a way which is really hard to debug.
